This article was downloaded by: University of California - Los Angeles
On: 27 Apr 2023
Access details: subscription number 10922
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: 5 Howick Place, London SW1P 1WG, UK



                                    The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of the Social Mind

                                    Julian Kiverstein

                                    Social Roles and Reification

                                    Publication details
                                    https://www.routledgehandbooks.com/doi/10.4324/9781315530178.ch25
                                    Ron Mallon
                                    Published online on: 07 Dec 2016




How to cite :- Ron Mallon. 07 Dec 2016, Social Roles and Reification from: The Routledge Handbook
of Philosophy of the Social Mind Routledge
Accessed on: 27 Apr 2023
https://www.routledgehandbooks.com/doi/10.4324/9781315530178.ch25



                                  PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR DOCUMENT

Full terms and conditions of use: https://www.routledgehandbooks.com/legal-notices/terms

This Document PDF may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproductions,
re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or
accurate or up to date. The publisher shall not be liable for an loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages
whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781




                                                                                                                                                         25
                                                                                                                                                 SOCIAL ROLES AND
                                                                                                                                                   REIFICATION1
                                                                                                                                                                       Ron Mallon



                                                                                                                           Stand in a crowded urban center, and you can see an extraordinarily diverse, amazingly com-
                                                                                                                           plex social world that is structured in part by widespread understandings about the properties,
                                                                                                                           functions, rights, privileges, duties, obligations, and restraints of certain groups of people in
                                                                                                                           certain domains – structured in part by social roles.
                                                                                                                               One source of such roles is our institutions. Our institutions are full of social roles like
                                                                                                                           teacher, lawyer, doctor, member of Congress, Starbucks barista, licensed pipefitter, and fully-
                                                                                                                           paid-up member of the American Philosophical Association, and these social roles structure
                                                                                                                           permissions, restrictions, expectations, and behaviors in ways that facilitate coordination and,
                                                                                                                           sometimes, cooperation. When we look across the crowd, we see many conspicuous markers
                                                                                                                           of such social role status, including uniforms and badges that allow us to fix expectations for
                                                                                                                           interpersonal regulation, coordination, and cooperation.
                                                                                                                               But there is also a long social constructionist tradition that insists upon the importance of
                                                                                                                           another type of social role: social roles like being a man or a woman; homosexual or straight; Asian,
                                                                                                                           black, or white; angry or sad.This second group of roles differs from institutional roles in that these
                                                                                                                           categories are widely understood to be natural kinds of person – kinds that exist or have their
                                                                                                                           character independently of our classificatory practices, perhaps because they are some sort of
                                                                                                                           biological kind. Again, when we look out on the street, we see many indicators of membership
                                                                                                                           in these roles. For sex and race, conspicuous features of the body are often taken to be indicators
                                                                                                                           of kind membership. In some cases, clothing or other artifacts may indicate membership as well.
                                                                                                                               In the face of the temptation to treat such kinds as natural, social constructionists provocatively
                                                                                                                           insist that these kinds are actually some sort of social kind – a product of our culture, decisions, or
                                                                                                                           social practices. Social constructionists think that these kinds exist because of our (historical and cur-
                                                                                                                           rent) practices of thinking of them and treating them as different. In effect, they attempt to explain
                                                                                                                           kind differences not by appeal to nature, but by appeal to social roles. Borrowing some terminology
                                                                                                                           from Paul Griffiths (1997), we can call the transparent, institutional sort of social role an overt role or
                                                                                                                           construction, and the latter, putatively natural but actually social kind, a covert role or construction.
                                                                                                                               Examples of covert constructionist claims about human kinds are not hard to find in the con-
                                                                                                                           temporary humanities and social sciences. Begin with race.The philosopher Paul Taylor writes that,

                                                                                                                                White supremacist societies created the Races they thought they were discovering,
                                                                                                                                and the ongoing political developments in these societies continued to re-create


                                                                                                                                                                              431
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                       Ron Mallon


                                                                                                                               them. . . . All of this is to say: our Western races are social constructs. They are things
                                                                                                                               that we humans create in the transactions that define social life.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (2013, 179)

                                                                                                                           Michael Omi and Howard Winant similarly claim:

                                                                                                                               The effort must be made to understand race as an unstable and “decentered” complex
                                                                                                                               of social meanings constantly being transformed by political struggle. . . . The concept
                                                                                                                               of race continues to play a fundamental role in structuring and representing the social
                                                                                                                               world. The task for theory is to explain this situation. It is to avoid both the utopian
                                                                                                                               framework which sees race as an illusion we can somehow “get beyond,” and also the
                                                                                                                               essentialist formulation which sees race as something objective and fixed, a biological
                                                                                                                               datum. Thus we should think of race as an element of social structure . . .
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (1994, 55)

                                                                                                                           This core idea, that races are products of human sociocultural activity, but are widely believed
                                                                                                                           to be natural, is widespread among humanistic racial theorists.
                                                                                                                              Claims of the construction of gender kinds are also ubiquitous. For example, Catherine
                                                                                                                           McKinnon claims of gender that:

                                                                                                                               Gender has no basis in anything other than the social reality its hegemony constructs.
                                                                                                                               Gender is what gender means. The process that gives sexuality its male supremacist
                                                                                                                               meaning is the same process through which gender inequality becomes socially real.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (1987, 173)

                                                                                                                           The suggestion is, again, that gender differences are products of our cultural practices of assign-
                                                                                                                           ing meanings to bodies and differentially treating them, resulting in differences that are mistak-
                                                                                                                           enly interpreted as natural.
                                                                                                                              Another influential example is Michel Foucault’s (1978) claim that as ideas or concepts of
                                                                                                                           sexuality shifted in nineteenth-century Europe, they became more committed to the idea that
                                                                                                                           sexual behavior was indicative of importantly different, underlying kinds of people. And Fou-
                                                                                                                           cault believes these new understandings actually caused homosexuality to come to exist (not
                                                                                                                           just the label, the idea, or the concept, but the kind itself).
                                                                                                                              Such claims raise many questions; here I focus upon the question of what covertly con-
                                                                                                                           structed kinds are. Suppose that we allow that covert constructionists are correct that some
                                                                                                                           putatively natural human kinds are actually a production of our social and conceptual activities,
                                                                                                                           that they are some sort of social role. What explains their apparent existence and sustains their
                                                                                                                           causal power over time?
                                                                                                                              Notice that the natural kind theorist answers these questions by appealing to the natural
                                                                                                                           kind; the natural kind gender theorist, for example, answers these questions by appeal to bio-
                                                                                                                           logical sex. In contrast, the social constructionist wants to appeal to widespread understandings
                                                                                                                           of gender and the social practices that they structure to explain gender kinds. But how shall
                                                                                                                           we understand these?
                                                                                                                              Because they are produced in some way by our social and conceptual activities, it is tempt-
                                                                                                                           ing to understand covert social roles by analogy with overt institutional roles. In both cases, our
                                                                                                                           social and cultural practices serve to differentiate social role members from others, creating real-
                                                                                                                           world effects. And, in both cases, if we could intervene upon these representational practices,
                                                                                                                           we could thereby alter their consequences.

                                                                                                                                                                          432
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                Social roles and reification


                                                                                                                              Despite these similarities, covert, socially constructed human categories are a different kind
                                                                                                                           of kind than institutional categories.The mechanism that stabilizes and sustains these kinds over
                                                                                                                           time is different (Mallon in press). Appreciating this difference is crucial to appreciating the dif-
                                                                                                                           ferent sorts of ways our social world acquires its structure and to understanding how we might
                                                                                                                           go about transforming or eliminating them.
                                                                                                                              Here is how I proceed. In the first section, I briefly articulate this understanding of covert
                                                                                                                           constructionist explanations as appealing to social roles. I then consider the possibility of inter-
                                                                                                                           preting such constructed roles as products of overt construction. But, I go on to argue, overt
                                                                                                                           and covert constructions are different kinds of kinds. I conclude by connecting the discussion
                                                                                                                           to concerns with social change.

                                                                                                                                                                      Social roles
                                                                                                                           I am interpreting the social constructionist as understanding social kinds as a sort of social role
                                                                                                                           (cf. Griffiths 1997; Mallon 2003, Mallon and Kelly 2012, Mallon 2016). As I use the term, a
                                                                                                                           social role is created when a kind representation becomes widespread, common knowledge in a
                                                                                                                           community. A social role in this sense exists in a community when ideas about the membership
                                                                                                                           conditions for the role, about the permissions, duties, and other norms attaching to role mem-
                                                                                                                           bers, and about role-typical properties, become something everyone in a community knows,
                                                                                                                           knows that every knows, and so on.2
                                                                                                                               For covert social roles, these representations represent kind membership or kind typical
                                                                                                                           properties as “natural” facts. In many cases, such facts may be explained as the result of bio-
                                                                                                                           logical or endogenous features of kind members, but it could also include extrinsic causes like
                                                                                                                           “divine will”.The important feature of this sense of “natural” is that the existence and character
                                                                                                                           of the kind is understood as given and as independent of human choices either in the past or
                                                                                                                           at present.
                                                                                                                               Such representations may also include stereotypes or other sorts of representations that
                                                                                                                           distinguish category members. The causal power of the resulting kinds is then explained by
                                                                                                                           appeal to the causal effects of the representations upon behavior with regard to, toward, and by
                                                                                                                           kind members. Such causal effects of representations may occur via a range of causal pathways,
                                                                                                                           including both actions and policies guided by explicit beliefs about kind members (e.g. rac-
                                                                                                                           ist or sexist beliefs) and also pathways in which representations influence individual behavior
                                                                                                                           automatically and perhaps unconsciously in ways that can be at odds with background beliefs
                                                                                                                           or intentions (cf. Bargh and Chartrand 1999; Gendler 2008; Huebner 2009; Mallon in press).
                                                                                                                               (Actual or possible) features of the constructed kinds may then be understood or explained
                                                                                                                           by considering the meaning of the kind representations as well as the mechanisms by which
                                                                                                                           those representations influence behavior by and towards kind members. This is an elaboration
                                                                                                                           of the covert constructionist position, going beyond what constructionists typically say. Still,
                                                                                                                           something like this elaboration seems necessary in order for the sorts of claims considered
                                                                                                                           above (and many others in the humanities and social sciences) to be true. It allows us to under-
                                                                                                                           stand provocative claims like Foucault’s insistence that homosexuality first came to exist in the
                                                                                                                           nineteenth century as a claim about a certain kind representation coming to be widespread in
                                                                                                                           a way that structured social life.
                                                                                                                               On such a picture, the social constructionist about a human kind appeals to the social
                                                                                                                           role – the widespread representation and its systematic causal effects on the social environment
                                                                                                                           and on kind members – in explanation of the existence or features of a category in a way that
                                                                                                                           parallels the natural kind theorists’ appeal to underlying natural difference. Both the construc-
                                                                                                                           tionist and the natural kind theorist hold that the underlying category is a real thing, but they

                                                                                                                                                                           433
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                          Ron Mallon


                                                                                                                           disagree about the character or nature of that thing. What remains for both of them to provide
                                                                                                                           is a further specification of the underlying kinds or mechanisms, and an account of how, exactly,
                                                                                                                           these explain whatever differences or regularities are in question.

                                                                                                                                                                Appealing to overt kinds
                                                                                                                           But how should we understand the mechanism or mechanisms that sustain covertly con-
                                                                                                                           structed social roles and make them causally powerful? One promising suggestion is that we
                                                                                                                           should understand socially constructed covert kinds in the same way we understand socially
                                                                                                                           constructed overt kinds, like social institutions. As I noted at the outset, there are many insti-
                                                                                                                           tutional social roles, roles like being a licensed driver, or being the President of the United States, for
                                                                                                                           which the differential features of the persons in the roles apparently stem from some set of
                                                                                                                           social institutions and conventions.
                                                                                                                              Many philosophers hint at this strategy by using social institutions as illustrations for under-
                                                                                                                           standing the features of covert social constructions. For example, Sally Haslanger writes:

                                                                                                                                Consider a landlord. One is a landlord by virtue of one’s role in a broad system of
                                                                                                                                social and economic relations which includes tenants, property, and the like. Even if
                                                                                                                                it turned out as a matter of fact that all and only landlords had a closed loop in the
                                                                                                                                center of their right thumbprint, the basis for being counted a landlord is different
                                                                                                                                from the basis for being counted as having such a thumbprint. Likewise for gender,
                                                                                                                                one is a woman, not by virtue of one’s intrinsic features (for example, body type), but
                                                                                                                                by virtue of one’s part in a system of social relations which includes, among other
                                                                                                                                things, men. Gender is a relational or extrinsic property of individuals, and the rela-
                                                                                                                                tions in question are social.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (2012, 42–43)

                                                                                                                           Haslanger draws a useful analogy between an overt, institutional role like “landlord” and the
                                                                                                                           sort of covert social role hypothesized by the constructionist, appealing to conceptually struc-
                                                                                                                           tured relations among people to explain the reality of each.
                                                                                                                               But how far can we take this analogy? Can we understand covert constructions as the same
                                                                                                                           kind of thing as overt constructions? The fruitful analogy between them makes this tempting. And
                                                                                                                           this temptation to treat them as alike is further aided by two background trends. First, a long tra-
                                                                                                                           dition of social philosophical work intimates the possibility that conventional or institutional facts
                                                                                                                           become reified or naturalized, in a process in which their institutional or social origin comes to be
                                                                                                                           no longer widely understood. Second, recent decades have brought considerable progress in phil-
                                                                                                                           osophical social ontology, that is, in the offering of explicit accounts of the nature of such entities
                                                                                                                           as social institutions, conventions, and group mental states. Here, as elsewhere in philosophy, it is
                                                                                                                           tempting to understand what is poorly understood by appeal to what is better understood.


                                                                                                                                                                          Reification
                                                                                                                           One old, Marxist strand of social scientific thought understands apparently natural facts as
                                                                                                                           the “reified” products of past social arrangements. In Capital, Marx writes of “commodity
                                                                                                                           fetishization”:

                                                                                                                                A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character
                                                                                                                                of men’s labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product

                                                                                                                                                                              434
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                Social roles and reification


                                                                                                                               of that labour. . . . In the same way the light from an object is perceived by us not as
                                                                                                                               the subjective excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of something
                                                                                                                               outside the eye itself.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (Marx 1967, 77)

                                                                                                                           Marx’s work on commodity fetishization motivates later work by György Lukács (1923) and
                                                                                                                           others on “reification”: the process by which facts produced by social arrangements later come
                                                                                                                           to be conceived as existing and having come about independently of those relations. These
                                                                                                                           facts may even be seen as having occasioned those relations. A connection between reification
                                                                                                                           of this sort and covert constructions is not hard to draw. Certain distinctions between superfi-
                                                                                                                           cially different categories might begin as explicit institutions or conventions, but, over time, the
                                                                                                                           differences these conventions produce come to be accepted as natural divisions or the causal
                                                                                                                           consequence of natural divisions that are rooted in intrinsic differences among category mem-
                                                                                                                           bers. For instance, a division of labor by sex that begins as a mere convenience (“Let’s say that
                                                                                                                           the women will do the A tasks, and the men, the B tasks”) comes to be understood as a natural
                                                                                                                           assignment, reflecting organic, sex-specific fitness to the tasks (“Women are just naturally better
                                                                                                                           at the A tasks, and men are naturally fitted to the B tasks”).
                                                                                                                               Similarly, John Searle (1995, 4, 47, 118; cf. Searle 2010) suggests that people may forget, or
                                                                                                                           never even learn, the social character of social facts, mistakenly believing that gold or money is
                                                                                                                           intrinsically valuable, or that some kind of person is naturally suited to rule. He writes:

                                                                                                                               The complex structure of social reality is, so to speak, weightless and invisible. The
                                                                                                                               child is brought up in a culture where he or she simply takes social reality for granted.
                                                                                                                               We learn to perceive and use cars, bathtubs, houses, money, restaurants, and schools
                                                                                                                               without reflecting on the special features of their ontology and without being aware
                                                                                                                               they have a special ontology. They seem as natural to us as stones and water and trees.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (1995, 4)

                                                                                                                           According to Searle, such social facts are established by our socio-linguistic activities, but then
                                                                                                                           later mistaken for natural facts. More recently, he writes:

                                                                                                                               There is no general answer to the question of why people accept institutions. Indeed,
                                                                                                                               there are all sorts of institutions where people cheerfully accept what would appear
                                                                                                                               to be unjust arrangements. One thinks of various class structures, the low position of
                                                                                                                               women in many societies, and vastly disproportionate distributions of money, prop-
                                                                                                                               erty, and power. But one feature that runs through a large number of cases is that in
                                                                                                                               accepting the institutional facts, people do not typically understand what is going on.
                                                                                                                               They do not think of private property, and the institutions for allocating private prop-
                                                                                                                               erty, or human rights, or governments as human creations.They tend to think of them
                                                                                                                               as part of the natural order of things; to be taken for granted in the same way they
                                                                                                                               take for granted the weather or the force of gravity. Sometimes, indeed, they believe
                                                                                                                               institutions to be consequences of a Divine will.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           (2010, 107)

                                                                                                                           Searle here suggests a specific account by which covert construction comes about: explicit,
                                                                                                                           institutional structures are established by social practices, and then later mistaken as features of
                                                                                                                           the natural world – an example of what we called reification above.

                                                                                                                                                                           435
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                          Ron Mallon


                                                                                                                               How do such mistakes come about? One venerable tradition emphasizes the role of power-
                                                                                                                           ful interests in creating an ideology that rationalizes these interests. Looked at in this way, failure
                                                                                                                           to preserve or promulgate the correct account of some component of social reality can be part
                                                                                                                           of a plan to conserve or enhance the interests of those who benefit from this arrangement by
                                                                                                                           deceiving the population. It is also possible that such a shift occurs for much more mundane
                                                                                                                           reasons – not because of an intention to mislead, but because of a failure to be concerned with
                                                                                                                           the truth, perhaps assisted by an implicit deference to existing states of affairs or power struc-
                                                                                                                           tures and perhaps aided by psychological biases like folk essentialism (Gelman 2003) or the
                                                                                                                           “fundamental attribution error” in which behavior is explained by appeal to intrinsic features
                                                                                                                           of individuals rather than features of their situation (Ross and Nisbett 1991). Call such a shift
                                                                                                                           from the knowing creation of institutions to ignorance “collective forgetting”.
                                                                                                                               Whatever its source or cause, such collective forgetting suggests the possibility that covert
                                                                                                                           constructions are essentially just overt constructions – they are, for instance, simply human
                                                                                                                           institutions that we have ceased to recognize as such. This is Searle’s view. Crucially, on Searle’s
                                                                                                                           rendering, reification does not change the institutional character of what is reified. If he is right, then
                                                                                                                           to understand the nature of covert constructions, we need simply to understand the nature of
                                                                                                                           institutions and other aspects of overtly constructed social reality.


                                                                                                                                                     Social ontology: institutions and conventions
                                                                                                                           Searle’s own account of institutional facts has it that such facts depend upon the collective
                                                                                                                           imposition of function on some thing or things that occurs when there is collective acceptance of
                                                                                                                           a statement of the form:

                                                                                                                                X counts as Y in C.3

                                                                                                                           For Searle, “X” is a specification of the individual or type to which the status function applies.
                                                                                                                           For instance, it might specify that tokens of a certain type produced by the U.S. mint count
                                                                                                                           as money in the United States. As Searle emphasizes, status functions of this type go beyond
                                                                                                                           what the intrinsic features of X can secure according to natural laws. There is nothing about
                                                                                                                           the intrinsic features of the tokens that we use as money that gives them the values that they
                                                                                                                           are assigned. Indeed, we can assign the same value to vastly (intrinsically) different tokens: paper,
                                                                                                                           coins, or digital data structures. Their value obtains in virtue of collective acceptance of one or
                                                                                                                           more status functions. “C” specifies the context in which this imposition occurs.4
                                                                                                                               According to Searle, collective acceptance reflects a “collective intentionality”, a feature of
                                                                                                                           human cooperative practices. And, according to Searle, the status functions it imposes carry
                                                                                                                           social obligations – “deontic powers” – that also explain their success as devices for social
                                                                                                                           organization.
                                                                                                                               As Searle understands them, these collective intentions are a sort of distinctive propositional
                                                                                                                           attitude, “we-intentions” (1990, 1995, 23–26; 2010, 43ff ). For example, they might come about
                                                                                                                           when a group decides that “we intend that paper marked as such from the U.S. mint count as
                                                                                                                           money in the United States.” According to Searle, they are irreducible to the “I-intentions” that
                                                                                                                           may be present in the mind of members of a population, indicating an understanding by those
                                                                                                                           individuals of the collective character of the undertaking.5
                                                                                                                               Searle contrasts his account with other accounts of social reality that make no use of “we-
                                                                                                                           intentions”. For instance, a different prominent account of some important features of social
                                                                                                                           reality is found in David Lewis’s (1969) account of conventions. On Lewis’s account, a conven-
                                                                                                                           tion is sustained when it is true that, and it is common knowledge that, everyone participates

                                                                                                                                                                              436
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                  Social roles and reification


                                                                                                                           in a regularity (for example, driving on the right side of the road) on condition that everyone else
                                                                                                                           does (1969, 76). Crucial to Lewis’s account of convention is that such a conventional conform-
                                                                                                                           ity is a Nash equilibrium, a regularity that no one can unilaterally deviate from and better satisfy
                                                                                                                           her own preferences. Because it is irrational for an individual to unilaterally deviate from the
                                                                                                                           regularity, individual self-interest stabilizes the regularity.


                                                                                                                                                         Can we overtly construct covert kinds?
                                                                                                                           How could we employ Searle’s account of institutions or Lewis’s account of conventions to
                                                                                                                           understand covert kinds? Returning to the example of race, we might – as Naomi Zack has
                                                                                                                           (1999, 2002) – apply Searle’s schema straightforwardly to generate an account of the social
                                                                                                                           construction of a set of racial categories. Zack writes:

                                                                                                                                Let skin shade of a certain reflective index, or the existence of an ancestor with skin
                                                                                                                                shade of that reflective index be X. In the context of the United States, X could count
                                                                                                                                as “racially black” (or as “racially white” for a different value of X). . . . Any criterion
                                                                                                                                for racial membership that has a physical factual basis could be some X that gets
                                                                                                                                constructed as a Y or racial classification. Thus, it is racial membership that is socially
                                                                                                                                constructed in Searle’s sense.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (2002, 108)

                                                                                                                           It is not hard to imagine applying the schema to other putatively natural categories as well,
                                                                                                                           and when we do so, it nicely explicates the constructionist idea that the differential features
                                                                                                                           of category members are dependent upon our socio-linguistic practices in differentially treat-
                                                                                                                           ing them.
                                                                                                                               Alternatively, we might try to understand a norm of differential treatment of some group
                                                                                                                           of people as a Lewisian convention. Consider a case where we take members of a group G to
                                                                                                                           have a favored or disfavored status with regard to a kind of activity A. This could be a racial
                                                                                                                           group that is supposed to be good at sports or at math. Or a sex group that is supposed to be
                                                                                                                           bad at fighting or at nurturing. In each of these cases, we could try to understand our treatment
                                                                                                                           of members of G as preferred for A as a conventional fact, as adherence to the norm:

                                                                                                                                Treat G’s as worse at A.

                                                                                                                           On the condition that others do so. Where a system of such norms existed with regard to a
                                                                                                                           category G, we could explain the apparent reality of G by appeal to the system of Lewisian con-
                                                                                                                           ventions. If this were the right account, it would explain how our social practices of differential
                                                                                                                           treatment depend upon the rational dispositions of individual actors, given their self-interest
                                                                                                                           and their beliefs about what others will do.

                                                                                                                                           Covert constructions are not institutions or conventions
                                                                                                                           Unfortunately, this approach does not work. Covert constructions are, by hypothesis, different
                                                                                                                           than overt constructions like Searlean institutions or Lewisian conventions. For covert con-
                                                                                                                           structions, but not overt constructions, we treat them differentially because we mistakenly take
                                                                                                                           them to be naturally different, and this false story rationalizes differential treatment, which stabilizes
                                                                                                                           the thought and behavior that sustains the social role over time. This difference is not merely
                                                                                                                           epistemic, but actually constitutes overt and covert kinds as different kinds of kinds.

                                                                                                                                                                             437
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                       Ron Mallon


                                                                                                                                                                     Kind identity
                                                                                                                           What makes two sorts of kinds the same or different? Here I understand the notion of a kind
                                                                                                                           using Richard Boyd’s influential idea of a causally homeostatic property cluster kind (1988,
                                                                                                                           1991, 1999). While natural kinds have traditional been understood to be characterized by a
                                                                                                                           simple, all-or-nothing essence, Boyd instead suggests that such kinds can be characterized by
                                                                                                                           a “cluster” of typical but not individually necessary properties that co-occur in the world and
                                                                                                                           whose possession is not an all-or-nothing affair for members of the kind. The co-occurrence
                                                                                                                           of such properties in the kind is not an accident, but is the result of some sort of mechanism of
                                                                                                                           causal homeostasis that sustains the co-occurrence of the properties, enabling reference to the
                                                                                                                           kind to be useful in our predictive and explanatory enterprises.
                                                                                                                               It is a virtue of such an account that it allows us to extend the idea of natural kinds to the
                                                                                                                           complex and varied kinds that we find in the special sciences, and indeed, as Boyd himself has
                                                                                                                           acknowledged, allows extension to kinds that “combine naturalistic and conventional features
                                                                                                                           in quite complex ways” (1991, 140). I have argued elsewhere that we can understand con-
                                                                                                                           structed social role kinds in this way (Mallon 2003, 2016).When we do, we get that constructed
                                                                                                                           kinds are individuated, at least in part, by the mechanism of causal homeostasis for the kind.
                                                                                                                           Where these are the same, we can say that the same kind occurs, and where different, different.6
                                                                                                                           Here I assume that a claim of the sort “A and B are different kinds” is true whenever A and B
                                                                                                                           have different mechanisms of causal homeostasis. It is difference between such mechanisms that
                                                                                                                           distinguishes overt and covert socially constructed social roles.


                                                                                                                                            Covert constructions are different: the epistemic argument
                                                                                                                           We can begin to see that covert constructions are different than overt constructions by consid-
                                                                                                                           ering the epistemic distinctiveness of overt constructions.
                                                                                                                              Edouard Machery (2014) has argued that reified social facts cannot be Searlean imposi-
                                                                                                                           tions of function because the ignorance that everyone (including Searle) suggests accompa-
                                                                                                                           nies reification is incompatible with the knowledge required by the collective imposition of
                                                                                                                           function.

                                                                                                                               [People] tend to think of races as natural, biological kinds, and they often adopt an
                                                                                                                               essentialist attitude toward them. But if people think that races are natural, biological
                                                                                                                               kinds, they cannot collectively recognize, in the relevant sense, the social status of races
                                                                                                                               nor their attendant social roles.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (Machery 2014, 93)

                                                                                                                           These arguments bring out the contradiction in treating covert constructions as institutions:
                                                                                                                           a thing cannot be simultaneously widely believed to be natural and widely believed to be a
                                                                                                                           product of a collectively imposed convention or status function.
                                                                                                                              But Machery’s argument makes an assumption that Searle seems to reject, the assumption
                                                                                                                           that the operation of status functions requires collective recognition. Searle writes,

                                                                                                                               The acceptance of an institutional fact, or indeed, of a whole system of status func-
                                                                                                                               tions, may be based on false beliefs. From the point of institutional analysis, it does not
                                                                                                                               matter whether the beliefs are true or false. It only matters whether the people do in
                                                                                                                               fact collectively recognize or accept the system of status functions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (2010, 119)

                                                                                                                                                                          438
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                 Social roles and reification


                                                                                                                               Searle is correct that his account makes no assumption about the nature of the justification or
                                                                                                                           reasons for engaging in the imposition of a status function. Consider:

                                                                                                                                G. We intend that persons with properties p1, p2, . . . pn count as members of race r1
                                                                                                                                in C.

                                                                                                                           The reasons for G could advert to social structure, history, magic, nature, or whatever you like,
                                                                                                                           and it makes no difference to his institutional account. However, it is Searle’s account of the
                                                                                                                           propositional attitude G itself that runs afoul of the epistemic argument. Someone who genu-
                                                                                                                           inely believes in natural races does not participate in a collective intention like G. Rather, she
                                                                                                                           has a different, simpler propositional attitude:

                                                                                                                                H. I believe that persons with properties p1, p2, . . . pn are members of race r1.

                                                                                                                              False beliefs about naturalness are not Searlean impositions of functions. Thus, Machery
                                                                                                                           replies to Searle:

                                                                                                                                Searle’s response only seems plausible because of an equivocation. If recognizing
                                                                                                                                that some entity x has some property P just means judging that x has P, then, no
                                                                                                                                doubt, people can recognize that reified social entities have a social status and an
                                                                                                                                attendant function. In that sense, people can recognize, indeed collectively recog-
                                                                                                                                nize, that water is constituted of H2O. But, if collective recognition is to be under-
                                                                                                                                stood on the model of a declaration, then it makes little sense to recognize facts that
                                                                                                                                we believe are natural phenomena. As noted above, we do not recognize, in that
                                                                                                                                sense, that water is H2O. Because declarations are, for Searle, the basis of the mode
                                                                                                                                of existence of social entities, reification is a genuine problem for his account of
                                                                                                                                social ontology.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (2014, 98)

                                                                                                                           It does look as if the idea at the core of Searle’s account of social institutions, the idea of acts
                                                                                                                           that collectively impose status functions, acts that he comes to say have “the same logical form
                                                                                                                           as declarations” (2010, 13), requires collective recognition of the social nature of the fact. Thus,
                                                                                                                           Machery is correct that Searle cannot simultaneously allow for reification and for understand-
                                                                                                                           ing such reified kinds as institutions, in his sense.7
                                                                                                                               However, this passage and others from Searle suggest another possibility that Machery does
                                                                                                                           not consider, one connected to what we called collective forgetting. What if reification occurs
                                                                                                                           in a transition from an explicitly imposed status function to a mistakenly imposed status func-
                                                                                                                           tion? Let an event E at time t collectively impose a status function in Searlean fashion:

                                                                                                                                We intend that X’s count as Y’s in C.

                                                                                                                           On Searle’s view, E can be itself a declaration, or simply “have the logical form” of a declaration.
                                                                                                                           Machery’s point is that E entails collective recognition that the created fact is a social fact and
                                                                                                                           this is inconsistent with X’s counting as Y being understood as a natural fact.
                                                                                                                               But if E creates a social institution, that fact may not be recognized at a later time, a time after
                                                                                                                           t. Suppose at this later time, people forget (or fail to learn) about E and come to believe that

                                                                                                                                X’s are Y’s is a natural fact.

                                                                                                                                                                            439
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                       Ron Mallon


                                                                                                                           This collective forgetting model of reification seems to allow Searle to have his collective rec-
                                                                                                                           ognition (at t) and deny it too (later on). Anyone who wants to argue (like Machery and I) that
                                                                                                                           covert constructions cannot be understood as reified Searlean institutions needs an argument
                                                                                                                           for why these reified facts do not continue to be institutional facts even after their mode of
                                                                                                                           creation is forgotten. In the next section, I offer such an argument.
                                                                                                                               I have been framing this discussion in terms of Searle’s account of institutions that makes
                                                                                                                           use of the idea of we-intentions. However, we can see related phenomena on other accounts
                                                                                                                           of social reality. Consider again Lewis’s account of conventions. For Lewis, individual behavior
                                                                                                                           according to a conventional regularity is conditional upon each individual understanding of
                                                                                                                           what others will do given common knowledge of the situation and regularity. Conventions
                                                                                                                           amount to conformity with regularities that are Nash equilibria, where no one can unilaterally
                                                                                                                           deviate from the regularity and do better. Notice that this cognitive state – the state of believ-
                                                                                                                           ing one’s action is the best conditional upon the belief that others also recognize that their
                                                                                                                           actions are the best – is not the mental state that obtains of participants in a covert construction.
                                                                                                                           Rather, when one takes something to have its properties as a result of some natural, intrinsic
                                                                                                                           property, one treats it as having those properties independently of how oneself and others regard
                                                                                                                           it. In such cases, one’s actions in conformity with a regularity are conditional upon beliefs
                                                                                                                           about the human-independent features of the kind, not conditional upon the dispositions or
                                                                                                                           actions of others.


                                                                                                                                                 Different kinds of kinds: the ontological argument
                                                                                                                           Covert constructionists hold that putatively natural kinds are in fact produced by our socio-
                                                                                                                           linguistic activities. It follows from this general view:

                                                                                                                           1   Terms for covert constructions are widely believed to pick out natural kinds.
                                                                                                                           2   Terms for covert constructions actually pick out some sort of socially produced kind.

                                                                                                                           What we have been asking is if understanding the socially produced kind in 2 as a Searlean
                                                                                                                           institution or Lewisian convention is consistent with the truth of 1. In this sub-section, I argue
                                                                                                                           that it is not; “reification” makes a social role a different kind of kind.
                                                                                                                              What sort of kind is a Searlean institution? Take a simple example. Four friends find that
                                                                                                                           they all enjoy singing a cappella. They decide to declare themselves a barbershop quartet: the
                                                                                                                           Windy Wendells. They democratically elect a leader, Director of the Windy Wendells. Before
                                                                                                                           taking the vote, the quartet members have the intentional state:

                                                                                                                               We intend that whoever gets the most votes in our secret ballot counts as the Director
                                                                                                                               of the Windy Wendells for two years.

                                                                                                                           They hold an election, and Reed wins. They then have the mental state that:

                                                                                                                               We intend that Reed counts as the Director of the Windy Wendells for two years.

                                                                                                                           Furthermore, they agree:

                                                                                                                               We intend that the Director of the Windy Wendells shall set the concert schedule and
                                                                                                                               the song list for each concert.


                                                                                                                                                                           440
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                 Social roles and reification


                                                                                                                           The term “Director of the Windy Wendells” picks out a property that Reed has in virtue of the
                                                                                                                           existence of the imposed status function, one that gives him certain other prerogatives.
                                                                                                                               What gives the kind “Director of the Windy Wendells” its causal power and stability over
                                                                                                                           time? In its simplest formulation, the mechanism of an imposed status function is the set of
                                                                                                                           “we-intentions” that produce and maintain it, mental states that involve reference to oneself
                                                                                                                           and others as a collective. The we-intention works to produce and regulate behaviors by and
                                                                                                                           towards members of a kind because we-intentions carry with them what Searle calls “deon-
                                                                                                                           tic powers” that work upon prima facie dispositions to cooperate with others in sustaining
                                                                                                                           the institution. The mental dispositions of people to remember imposed status functions and
                                                                                                                           respect their deontic force stabilize institutional kinds, giving them their causal power.
                                                                                                                               This is not true for covert constructions. Even if an entity begins as a Searlean institution,
                                                                                                                           reification suggests that cooperative we-intentions no longer obtain. Reification involves a
                                                                                                                           situation in which status functions are no longer remembered as such, and so they do not have
                                                                                                                           deontic power. In such cases, X’s are Y’s is not seen as a result of cooperation or collective inten-
                                                                                                                           tionality. It is rather believed to be the result of natural facts about X’s. It follows that covert
                                                                                                                           constructions lack the mechanism that lies at the heart of overt, Searlean institutions: the exist-
                                                                                                                           ence of we-intentions and the attendant dispositions to cooperate.
                                                                                                                               What holds covert constructions together, then? Covert constructions contrast with overt
                                                                                                                           constructions in that covert constructions are stabilized by the mistaken belief in their naturalness.
                                                                                                                           The idea that a kind can be stabilized by mistaken belief in its naturalness is very old in phi-
                                                                                                                           losophy. Famously, Plato in The Republic advocates stabilizing the social order of the Republic
                                                                                                                           by spreading a “noble lie”:

                                                                                                                                we will say in our tale, yet God in fashioning those of you who are fitted to hold rule
                                                                                                                                mingled gold in their generation, for which reason they are the most precious – but
                                                                                                                                in the helpers silver, and iron and brass in the farmers and other craftsmen.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (1961, 415a-b)

                                                                                                                           The different social roles of the Republic are stabilized not only by institution or by conven-
                                                                                                                           tion, but also by belief in underlying facts about the natures of each of the social classes. On
                                                                                                                           this interpretation, the constructionist view rests on the idea, exploited by Plato, that belief in
                                                                                                                           the naturalness of a category is a mechanism that can stabilize a kind. Searle himself realizes the
                                                                                                                           possibility that, “In the extreme case an institutional fact might function only because it is not
                                                                                                                           believed to be an institutional fact” (2010, 119). But he fails to acknowledge that such a fact
                                                                                                                           would no longer be institutional in his sense, because the kind it makes reference to is not sus-
                                                                                                                           tained by we-intentions, deontic powers, or cooperative dispositions. Because the mechanism
                                                                                                                           of causal homeostasis is different, the kind is different.
                                                                                                                               We can illustrate these differences between overt and covert constructions by consider-
                                                                                                                           ing the differing counterfactuals that emerge between overt and covert constructionist views
                                                                                                                           (Mallon in press). Consider a role like “traffic officer”. For Searle, roughly, what makes the
                                                                                                                           traffic officer a traffic officer, and gives her the right to direct traffic and issue traffic citations,
                                                                                                                           is the collective imposition of these functions upon her by a community. Counterfactually, if
                                                                                                                           everyone stopped imposing these functions, then there would be no status function and no
                                                                                                                           obligation to obey the officer. For each individual, there would no longer be a disposition to
                                                                                                                           continuing to act as if the traffic cop could give orders or issue citations.
                                                                                                                               And the point, again, extends to other accounts of social reality. Lewisian conventions depend
                                                                                                                           upon strategic choices by individuals, behavior that is contingent upon the rational preferences


                                                                                                                                                                             441
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                        Ron Mallon


                                                                                                                           of others. Consider the norm “stop when the traffic officer indicates to do so.” If this norm
                                                                                                                           were sustained by a Lewisian convention, each person’s participation in the regularity would
                                                                                                                           depend upon that person’s beliefs about what others will do, prefer, and so forth. If no one else
                                                                                                                           participated in the convention, that would undermine one’s own reasons for participating in it.
                                                                                                                              In contrast, in the covertly constructed social role case of the sort we have been considering,
                                                                                                                           behavior is sustained by beliefs in the natural features of the world. Consider a community c in
                                                                                                                           which men and women are equally able to perform a job type J, but that for various histori-
                                                                                                                           cal reasons women are more prevalent at job type J. Suppose, moreover, that, in c, it is widely
                                                                                                                           believed that

                                                                                                                                Q. Women are better at job type J because of their biology.

                                                                                                                               Suppose Sarah is an employer seeking to fill a job of type J. If Sarah, as others in c, believes Q,
                                                                                                                           then Sarah might rationally prefer women candidates for the job because of their putative supe-
                                                                                                                           riority at that type of work. This preference is not conditional upon everyone else endorsing a
                                                                                                                           status function nor is it conditional upon a desire to behave in accord with a regularity, given
                                                                                                                           that everyone else does. It is not even conditional upon others believing Q; if everyone else
                                                                                                                           believed that men were naturally better at J, Sarah might still rationally prefer to hire women
                                                                                                                           because of her belief in Q. This sort of illustration makes clear that covert constructions are
                                                                                                                           stabilized and explained by different facts than those that stabilize and explain overt construc-
                                                                                                                           tions. This is a reflection of the different mechanisms that stabilize overt and covert kinds – a
                                                                                                                           reflection of the fact that they are different kinds of kinds.
                                                                                                                               Generalizing, if one treats men or women or members of different races as having some
                                                                                                                           functions in virtue of a we-intention or convention, then that treatment is the result of mental
                                                                                                                           states that are conditional upon the psychological and behavioral dispositions of others. But if
                                                                                                                           one treats men or women or members of different races as different in virtue of natural facts,
                                                                                                                           then that treatment is the result of mental states that are not conditional upon beliefs about
                                                                                                                           others but rather conditional upon beliefs about the natural features of the world.
                                                                                                                               This discussion has been narrowly focused upon the character of socially constructed human
                                                                                                                           categories, arguing that there are at least two kinds of kinds that secure the stability of human
                                                                                                                           kinds: one centered on attitudes involving others (for Searle, collective acceptance; for Lewis,
                                                                                                                           common knowledge of a Nash equilibrium), and one centered upon mistaken naturalness. But
                                                                                                                           other recent work on social reality makes it tempting, and ultimately, I think correct, to draw
                                                                                                                           the more general conclusion that there are, as Brian Epstein has put it, “many kinds of social
                                                                                                                           glue” that hold the social world together (Epstein 2014). These may include something like
                                                                                                                           “collective intentions” of the sort that figures in work by Searle and others, the sort of game-
                                                                                                                           theoretic equilibria that Lewis’s account of convention emphasizes (cf. Mallon 2003), as well as
                                                                                                                           mistakes about what is natural that figure in constructionist work. Once we see this, we might
                                                                                                                           then add a range of other mechanisms that may play a role in stabilizing human categories and
                                                                                                                           add to their causal power (Mallon 2003; Mallon and Kelly 2012; Guala and Hindriks 2015). If
                                                                                                                           this is right, the argument I have given is a simply a piece in a larger shift towards recognition
                                                                                                                           of many mechanisms that produce social reality.

                                                                                                                                                            Reification and social change
                                                                                                                           The claim that covert constructions are not the same kind of kind as overt constructions is con-
                                                                                                                           sistent with the view that covert constructions began as institutions or conventions, sustained
                                                                                                                           by collective recognition or individual appreciation of a solution to a coordination problem.

                                                                                                                                                                            442
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                    Social roles and reification


                                                                                                                           Practices that were initially adhered to out of collective recognition might eventually have come
                                                                                                                           to be understood as natural facts. Because of the gradual turnover in population, such a transi-
                                                                                                                           tion may be described, as I have, as a sort of collective forgetting.The present argument is that as:

                                                                                                                                We intend that X’s count as Y’s in C.

                                                                                                                           gives way to the simple:

                                                                                                                                X’s are Y’s.

                                                                                                                           the character of the kind picked out by X undergoes an “alchemical” transformation: it becomes
                                                                                                                           a different kind because the mechanism that sustains it changes.
                                                                                                                               Recognition of multiple representational mechanisms that sustain social reality also suggests
                                                                                                                           a broader conclusion about critical practices: where human intentional processes produce or
                                                                                                                           stabilize the social world, transforming the social world via reasoned argument requires address-
                                                                                                                           ing the precise content of the intentions that produce and sustain it. Where overt construction
                                                                                                                           occurs, this involves explicit attention to the character of the status functions or conventions
                                                                                                                           that are in play, and what alternatives might take their place. But where covert construction is in
                                                                                                                           play, social transformation requires addressing and refuting false beliefs about the mechanisms
                                                                                                                           that produce the social world.
                                                                                                                               Many obstacles face such attempts at social transformation. Such false beliefs may themselves
                                                                                                                           be supported epistemically by the causal order the constructive processes have created. Power-
                                                                                                                           ful interests who benefit from existing arrangements may also stabilize them.8 And they may be
                                                                                                                           stabilized by psychological biases that create cognitive illusions of plausibility around mistaken
                                                                                                                           explanations.
                                                                                                                               Thus conceived, we can see the project of many covert social constructionists as the attempt
                                                                                                                           to, in effect, overcome these obstacles and reverse reification. Covert constructionists hope that
                                                                                                                           when we see that our practices are sustained by mistakes about the nature of human kinds,
                                                                                                                           the continuation of these practices will become a matter of collective choice or coordination,
                                                                                                                           opening the possibility of better choices or arrangements.


                                                                                                                                                                              Notes
                                                                                                                            1 I am grateful to Frank Hindriks and Julian Kiverstein for helpful criticism of an earlier version of this
                                                                                                                              paper.
                                                                                                                            2 Cf. Mallon (2016), ch. 2 for more discussion.
                                                                                                                            3 Later, Searle (2010) suggests several alternate renderings of the imposition of function.
                                                                                                                            4 Searle is just one prominent examples of a thriving literature on social ontology (see also, e.g., Tuomela
                                                                                                                              2013; Gilbert 1989).
                                                                                                                            5 More recently, Searle (2010) offers a number of emendations to his basic account, including acknowl-
                                                                                                                              edging “though ‘X counts as Y in C’ is one form of Status Function Declaration, there are also other
                                                                                                                              forms” (19). Still, he maintains: “all of human institutional reality is created and maintained in existence
                                                                                                                              by (representations that have the same logical form as) [Status Function] Declarations” (13).
                                                                                                                            6 Craver (2009), Khalidi (2013), and Slater (2015) all suggest that individuating mechanisms are not nec-
                                                                                                                              essary for kinds. Here I assume only that distinct mechanisms are a sufficient reason for a fine-grained
                                                                                                                              individuation of kinds.
                                                                                                                            7 Amy Thomasson (2003) similarly suggests that Searlean institutions produce a kind of first person
                                                                                                                              authority with regard to the nature of the institution. Such authority looks to be inconsistent with the
                                                                                                                              kind of error that reification seems to involve.
                                                                                                                            8 See, e.g., Petrović (1983). Some elaborations of Marx’s idea emphasize the connection of reification to
                                                                                                                              capital. Honneth (2008) offers further social theoretic discussion of reification.

                                                                                                                                                                                443
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                            Ron Mallon


                                                                                                                                                                           References
                                                                                                                           Bargh, J. & T. L. Chartrand (1999).The unbearable automaticity of being. American Psychologist, 54(7), 462–479.
                                                                                                                           Boyd, R. (1988). How to be a moral realist. In G. Sayre-McCord (Ed.), Essays on Moral Realism (pp. 181–228).
                                                                                                                               Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
                                                                                                                           ———. (1991). Realism, anti-foundationalism and the enthusiasm for natural kinds. Philosophical Studies, 61,
                                                                                                                               127–148.
                                                                                                                           ———. (1999). Kinds, complexity and multiple realization. Philosophical Studies, 95, 67–98.
                                                                                                                           Craver, C. F. (2009). Mechanisms and natural kinds. Philosophical Psychology, 22(5), 575–594.
                                                                                                                           Epstein, B. (2014). How many kinds of glue hold the social world together? In M. Gallotti and J. Michael
                                                                                                                               (Eds.), Social Ontology and Social Cognition (pp. 41–55). Dordrecht, NL: Springer
                                                                                                                           Foucault, M. (1978). The History of Sexuality,Vol. I: An Introduction. New York: Pantheon.
                                                                                                                           Gelman, S. A. (2003). The Essential Child: Origins of Essentialism in Everyday Thought. New York: Oxford Uni-
                                                                                                                               versity Press.
                                                                                                                           Gendler, T. (2008). Alief and belief. Journal of Philosophy, 105(10), 634–663.
                                                                                                                           Gilbert, M. (1989). On Social Facts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
                                                                                                                           Griffiths, P. E. (1997). What Emotions Really Are. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
                                                                                                                           Guala, F. & F. Hindriks (2015). A unified social ontology. Philosophical Quarterly, 65(259), 177–201.
                                                                                                                           Haslanger, S. A. (2012). Resisting Reality: Social Construction and Social Critique. New York: Oxford University
                                                                                                                               Press.
                                                                                                                           Honneth, A. (2008). Reification: A New Look At An Old Idea. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                                                                           Huebner, B. (2009). Troubles with stereotypes for spinozan minds. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 39(1),
                                                                                                                               63–92.
                                                                                                                           Khalidi, M. A. (2013). Natural Categories and Human Kinds: Classification in the Natural and Social Sciences. New
                                                                                                                               York: Cambridge University Press.
                                                                                                                           Lewis, D. (1969). Convention: A Philosophical Study. New Castle: Basil Blackwell.
                                                                                                                           Lukács, G. (1923/1971). Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat. In R. Livingstone (Ed.), His-
                                                                                                                               tory and Class Consciousness. R. Livingstone. (trans.) (pp. 83–222). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                                                                                                                           Machery, E. (2014). Social ontology and the objection from reification. In M. Gallotti and J. Michael (Eds.),
                                                                                                                               Perspectives on Social Ontology and Social Cognition (pp. 87–102). Dordrecht: Springer.
                                                                                                                           MacKinnon, C. A. (1987). Feminism Unmodified : Discourses On Life and Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
                                                                                                                               versity Press.
                                                                                                                           Mallon, R. (2003). Social construction, social roles and stability. In F. Schmitt (Ed.), Socializing Metaphysics
                                                                                                                               (pp. 327–353). Lanham, MD, Rowman and Littlefield.
                                                                                                                           ———. (in press). The Construction of Human Kinds. Oxford University Press.
                                                                                                                           Mallon, R. & D. Kelly (2012). Making race out of nothing: Psychologically constrained social roles. In H.
                                                                                                                               Kincaid (Ed.).The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Social Science (pp. 507–532). Oxford: Oxford Univer-
                                                                                                                               sity Press.
                                                                                                                           Marx, K. (1967). Capital: Unabridged, Vol. 1: A Critical Analysis of Capitalist Production. Edited by Frederick
                                                                                                                               Engels. Translated by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling from the Third German Edition. New York:
                                                                                                                               International Publishers.
                                                                                                                           Omi, M. & H. Winant (1994). Racial Formation in the United States: From the 1960s to the 1990s. New York:
                                                                                                                               Routledge.
                                                                                                                           Petrović, G. (1983). Reification. In T. Bottomore, L. Harris,V. G. Kiernan and R. Miliband (Eds.), A Dictionary
                                                                                                                               of Marxist Thought (pp. 411–413). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                                                                                                                           Plato (1961).The Republic. In E. Hamilton and H. Cairns (Eds.), The Collected Dialogues of Plato Including the
                                                                                                                               Letters (pp. 575–844). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
                                                                                                                           Ross, L. & R. E. Nisbett (1991). The Person and the Situation. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
                                                                                                                           Searle, J.R. (1990). Collective intentions and actions. In P.R. Cohen, J. Morgan and Martha Pollack
                                                                                                                               (Eds.), Intentions in Communication (pp. 401–415). MIT Press.
                                                                                                                           ———. (1995). The Construction of Social Reality. New York: Free Press.
                                                                                                                           ———. (2010). Making the Social World : The Structure Of Human Civilization. Oxford; New York: Oxford
                                                                                                                               University Press.

                                                                                                                                                                                 444
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
                                                                                                                                                                   Social roles and reification


                                                                                                                           Slater, M. H. (2015). Natural kindness. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 66(2), 375–411.
                                                                                                                           Taylor, P. C. (2013). Race: A Philosophical Introduction. Cambridge, UK; Malden, MA: Polity Press.
                                                                                                                           Thomasson, A. (2003). Realism and human kinds. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 67(3), 580–609.
                                                                                                                           Tuomela, R. (2013). Social Ontology: Collective Intentionality and Group Agents. New York: Oxford University
                                                                                                                               Press.
                                                                                                                           Zack, N. (1999). Philosophy and racial paradigms. Journal of Value Inquiry, 33, 299–317.
                                                                                                                           ———. (2002). Philosophy of Science and Race. New York: Routledge.




                                                                                                                                                                              445
Downloaded By: University of California - Los Angeles At: 16:46 27 Apr 2023; For: 9781315530178, chapter25, 10.4324/9781
